# Customer complaints and recommendations

It’s likely that complaining customers represent (hopefully!) a tiny proportion of the overall customer base, but by monitoring the general level of customer complaints a firm can judge its service delivery. Also, by analysing these complaints, the firm can gain diagnostic information about which aspects of its service are failing. Increasingly, firms are monitoring online complaints, not just complaints made directly to the firm. In recent years, the net promoter score (NPS) has become quite a popular measure of claimed willingness to recommend. However, research has not supported the claims that this metric is capable of predicting a company’s future performance (Sharp, 2008; Keiningham et al., 2007).

Contrary to popular belief, the NPS does not measure actual recommendations but only claimed willingness to recommend (presumably if asked), so in effect it is an attitude measure asking if the customer is happy enough with the brand that they would recommend it (if asked). It does not measure willingness to give negative word-of-mouth (East, 2008). Recently a new measure that measures propensity to give actual (and both positive and negative) word-of-mouth has been proposed (East, Romaniuk & Lomax, 2011).

In effect the NPS is just a satisfaction measure but, unlike questions about satisfaction with service elements, it is far less obvious what this measure actually measures, so it is more likely to confuse managers and staff.

Increasingly, firms are monitoring online word-of-mouth—even though most word-of-mouth happens offline—as online word-of-mouth is far cheaper to monitor. Great claims have been made about the value of this Big Data , how it can arrive continuously and quickly (in ‘real time’); however, what it means is far less clear than might be assumed at fi rst glance. For example, in late 2016 Apple launched new MacBook Pro models. As usual these new models were faster, thinner and lighter, plus this time they introduced a novel touch panel.

However, along with this good news came the radical announcement that Apple was replacing almost all the old connector ports with the latest USB-C, meaning that many new MacBook Pro owners would need to purchase several diff erent adapters or a hub with multiple ports to connect to their existing accessories and displays. This sparked a great deal of online discussion, and Google Trends reported a big surge in searches for the term ‘alternative to MacBook Pro’ (see Figure 3.2 below). It seemed obvious that many potential buyers were turned off by Apple’s radical move—and this was not the fi rst time, as Apple was the fi rst notebook brand to drop internal fl oppy disc drives.

Based on this online data commentators were quick to announce that Apple had gone too far, and would lose sales. But then research fi rm Slice Intelligence reported that the latest MacBook Pro had, in fi ve days, recorded more online sales than all competing laptops had in the entire year. Soon after, Apple’s Senior Vice President of Marketing Phil Schiller declared that the new MacBook Pro had received unprecedented orders and waiting lists would be much longer than expected (Rossignol, 2016).

This case is a reminder that while online ‘chatter’ might be easy to obtain, it is not easy to interpret. With hindsight we can see that the Google search data merely told us what was already obvious, that is, Apple’s decision to move early to new technology was upsetting some potential buyers. But it did not tell us if the launch would be particularly unsuccessful, successful, or just on target. Perhaps the search data also told us that there was great interest in the new MacBook Pro, and that it got good publicity—with hindsight we can see this, but before we knew of the sales performance it was impossible to know what the online word-of-mouth really meant—and it was very easy to misinterpret.

## CRITICAL REFLECTION

Reflect on the use of behavioural metrics in marketing. What questions can these metrics answer for marketing managers? What questions can’t behavioural metrics answer?
